
ANTIVIRUS MALWARE PRODUCTS
Article by
 	Aaron Stern

76 posts 
Share
 
Expert reviewers of the new Kaspersky Internet Security 2015 are raving about the new product’s protection capabilities, ease of use and low resource usage. But don’t take it from us, read about it from these 10 experts themselves:

Our-favorite-press-quotes
 

10 reviewers who love the new Kaspersky Internet Security

Tweet
7 Tutorials declares that Kaspersky Internet Security “continues to deliver some the best anti-malware protection on the market and its performance impact is mostly negligible on modern computers and devices.”
Betanews writes, “Kaspersky Internet Security 2015 excels where it matters: it’s an accurate and reliable security suite which does a great job of keeping malware at bay.”
PCWorld recommends Kaspersky’s multi-device protection capabilities, saying, “Kaspersky’s Internet Security — Multi-Device 2015 is easy to recommend if you’re a device junkie. Protection and performance are excellent, and this year’s interface is more polished than its predecessor without losing any usability.”
Amazon gives the product five stars – its highest rating, with reviewer Danny Penn saying “When my subscription for KIS 2015 nears its expiration date, I will gladly purchase yet another copy…”
Software Crew says the parental controls in KIS 2015 are “an excellent module which is easily good enough to be a stand-alone product.” And of the Safe Money feature they wrote “We tested it with three commercial keyloggers, and sure enough they weren’t able to capture anything we did online.” 
“KIS 2015 continues to deliver some the best anti-malware protection on the market and its performance impact is mostly negligible on modern computers and devices.” – 7 Tutorials
“Overall this product is one of the best security suite[s],” wrote Malware Tips reviewer MrExplorer – to which fellow MT member BoraMurdar objected, saying “[i]t isn’t ‘Probably the best’… It is ‘The Best.’”
CNet’s Download.com declares, “Kaspersky Internet Security 2015 is the best version thus far and, remarkably, one of the best-designed antivirus applications for Windows,” adding the program is “a top pick.”
PCMag says, “Antivirus is the star component in Kaspersky Internet Security (2015), with top ratings from all the independent [testing] labs.”
“We like the new interface, and as usual the suite provides rock solid protection,” says TechWorld.
“The bottom line is that Kaspersky’s Internet Security Multi-Device 2015 is the best antivirus software that I have reviewed to this date,” says Consumer High Five, adding “…Kaspersky has really taken their program to the next level.”
Kaspersky Internet Security 2015: The reviews are in – and they’re pretty good #humblebrag