Classic and modern… often standing side by side. Many of the world’s greatest cities are incredible collections of architectures, some old and some new, coming together for a common purpose. Not unlike these cities, any great enterprise still has the legacy platforms on which it has built its foundation; AIX, Solaris, and Windows 2003 to name a few, while rapidly adopting the most modern era architectures of cloud and containers.

These systems work together to create a blended infrastructure, often called hybrid-IT or hybrid cloud. 

Most organizations have adopted hybrid infrastructures not out of a deliberate strategy, but out of the desire to leverage the valuable resources invested in the datacenter, while developing new projects with cost saving and agile tools like the cloud. Continuously evolving over time based on the inherent need to grow, while seemingly chaotic, ultimately becoming something beautiful.

That leaves security with a challenge. How do you continue to protect syste
ms that are the foundation of the business but may be getting a little aged (or in the case of Windows 2000/2003, way past their expiry!) right up to the latest Docker deployments running in the cloud?

How do you balance protection from legacy systems to the most modern of architectures?

We are very excited to announce the release of Deep Security 10 powered by XGen™ security. Deep Security 10 embraces the challenge of hybrid cloud by making it ONE environment.

To protect this ONE environment, Deep Security connects to leading platforms and gives complete visibility over your servers, from physical to virtual to cloud and now containers with deep support for Docker. 

With the new smart folders, applications that span different infrastructures can be treated as one using a smart attribute-based grouping system. Now you can manage applications across vastly different infrastructure platforms as if they were one.

Like a city of different eras of architecture, we have seen the management model evolve too. From your traditional IT Security where projects managed centrally, to the latest mentality of security that is baked in, not bolted on. The reality is that DevSecOps is not a passing fad, but an ever-growing movement towards a better way to secure your systems. However, having a central security operations team is still a tried and true method.

To that end Deep Security 10 has at its core the support for flexible deployment, hybrid policy management, support for auto-scaling, and blue/green deployments. Trend Micro understands how to secure the long-standing physical servers, right up to the ephemeral servers living for mere minutes or even seconds in the cloud. This includes consumption-based licensing options for truly dynamic workloads. No matter how you manage security, Deep Security is designed to support the traditional IT security model or the latest DevSecOps.

That blend of the classic with the bleeding-edge continues to be our mindset on threat defense. 

Deep Security 10 is powered by XGen™ Security, a blend of cross-generational threat defense techniques. Deep Security leverages server-centric threat defense techniques from tried and true technologies like intrusion prevention and anti-malware, right up to the most leading threat defense techniques like sandbox analysis, machine learning and behavioral analysis to guard against the most sophisticated threats.

Deep Security 10 also introduces a new server-centric approach to application control. This is application control on a whole new level, where the CI/CD pipeline can be a trusted source of updates to the servers. Designed around servers, application control understands popular development languages and locks down your servers for even greater security and control. 

So the next time you’re in the city and you’re admiring a classic piece of architecture alongside a glass office tower, be sure to take it all in. Those structures exist harmoniously because of the inevitability of evolution and the need to support the foundation on which that city was built. Do you have a mixture of old and new? Perhaps it is time to look at the datacenter, the cloud, a container as just one of many elements in the server compute evolution, amidst constant change and growth, just like a bustling city. With Deep Security the hybrid cloud becomes this single environment, both new and old existing together, with built in server security that truly stands the test of time.

Learn more about Deep Security 10 from www.trendmicro.com/hybridcloud

If you have questions or comments, please post them below or follow me on Twitter: @justin_foster.