As a global leader in cybersecurity solutions Trend Micro takes helping to make the world safe for exchanging digital information very seriously. And for the past 27 years, we’ve taken our employees seriously. When you have an organization of more than 5,000 employees, it can sometimes be difficult to create a culture that means something to everyone. At Trend Micro we work hard to do just that as our company grows and new generations of employees join the team.

But we also are committed to providing the best-in-class benefits and wellness programs to our employees because we strongly believe that healthy and happy employees make better employees. We strive to provide modern amenities and facilities geared towards the physical and mental well-being of our employees to create a well-rounded work environment.

And today, I am proud to announce that Trend Micro has been named as one of the “Nation’s Best and Brightest in Wellness®” employers for 2016. The Best and Brightest in Wellness is an innovative initiative that recognizes and celebrates quality and excellence in health awareness.

The organization conducted a survey to assess employers on a variety of categories including their company culture, environment, employee input, participation, incentives and outcomes, as well as an overall average score with respect to employee benefits, health and wellness programs. Trend Micro scored significantly higher than average for each category across most of the parameters, with a perfect score in both leadership, benefits and programs.

The Best and Brightest in Wellness is a unique program highlighting companies, schools, faith-based groups and organizations that promote a culture of wellness, as well as plan, implement and evaluate efforts in employee wellness to make their business and the community a healthier place to live and work. The program’s mission and guiding principles are “Better Business. Richer Lives. Stronger Communities.”

Trend Micro has a robust history of providing employee-friendly policies and benefits. In November 2016, two Trend Micro facilities received a “Silver” level designation for being a Mother Friendly Worksite.