We live in challenging times. The pressures facing us all individually, and society as a whole, have never been greater, and at times, we’ve never seemed more fractured and destructive. In such times, it is easy to pull back, focus inward and look after number one. However, in truth it has never been more important to do the opposite: To reach out, engage, and make a bigger contribution to society. That is especially true of anything we can do to help the next generation of leaders, creators and innovators that will shape this country.

That’s why we’re extremely proud that more than 1,000 Trend Micro employees will work together to help out two Orlando schools during our fourth consecutive Building a Future service project this year.

Four in a row

So, what’s happening this year? We’re thrilled to be helping out at Sadler and Pinewood Elementary Schools in Orlando, Florida as part of our Building a Future project. Volunteer staff will spend time remodeling and painting parts of the buildings, refurbishing athletic fields, converting outdoor areas into learning hubs and installing reading benches and shrubbery. It’s all about helping the schools further become more inviting destinations, places that kid want to come and spend more time at, not just for the academics but for the extracurricular too. It’s also about making the schools places that students and teachers can feel genuinely proud of, and wanting to spend more time there.

Our volunteers will also be donating school supplies in order help improve parent and teacher resources. Having seen previous efforts – at New Orleans’ Schaumburg Elementary in 2014, at Orlando’s Grand Avenue Primary Learning Center last year, and campuses in the Dallas Independent School District in 2015 – make a real difference, we cannot wait to get started this year.

Being a responsible corporate citizen is not a question of giving up your time and resources. It’s an investment in our collective future.

A social conscience

At Trend Micro, we take our corporate responsibility very seriously; in fact, it is built in our DNA and defines who we are. We were founded more than 27 years ago with a driving desire to provide a worthy service to society – to make the internet safe for people and organizations to connect and share information, whether they’re our customers or not. Today we continue that ethos by being a socially responsible corporate citizen – committed to respecting our environment, lifting up those less fortunate and helping to invest in our future, our youth.

The projects we’ve launched over the years to support the communities in which we live and work include everything from building homes for disadvantaged locals in the Philippines, to Give and Match programs supporting community initiatives across the globe. And when it comes to cybersecurity we do our best to spread the message as far and wide as possible. Ongoing campaigns include subsidized products for low-income Taiwanese families. And our long-running Internet Safety for Kids & Families program, which is now global.

We practice what we preach too. In Europe, half of all Trend Micro employees use alternate transportation – a feat that has helped us to be named to the Dow Jones Sustainability Index.